# RatioUnfold

The purpose of this code is to:
- simulate proton-proton collisions and their outputs
- Take these datasets, process them, and read out their raw input
- Take two datasets, in our case either values from W+jets and Z+jets processes or two values from W+jets process, and take the double ratio as a correction factor
- Do a matrix and SVD unfolding
- Do cDDPM unfolding
- Plotting results
# Abstract

Unfolding is a critical computational technique in experimental physics, as it gives insight into the true characteristics of data that have been altered through measurement. In the context of high-energy particle collisions, fundamental particle phenomenology is modeled by probability density functions (pdf) for various underlying physical quantities such as the momentum and energy of final-state particles, which are testing aspects of the Standard Model of Particle physics, the theory that describes particles at the smallest distance ever probed by human means. In particular interest to the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the premier high-energy physics facility in the world, is uncovering the theory of the strong interaction, which is responsible for the process of proton collision, several fundamental processes, and production of final-state particles. However, to observe probability functions predicted by QCD and measurable effects, it is necessary to use detectors that can distort these pdfs and quantities through subtle interactions. Unfolding techniques allow us to use models of these detector effects by simulating the complex instrumentation used for detection to ultimately make inference about underlying pdfs that could be compared to theoretical predictions. To construct unfolding methods of significant interest for testing the theory of QCD at hadron collider is the measurement of ratio observables as they’re significantly more precise than absolute measurements by exploiting positive correlations between systematic uncertainties to mitigate them. Subsequently, the ratios are sensitive to differences in any given QCD effects between processes because of the correlation between processes. They are therefore ideal for fine-tuning modeling issues that are difficult to study in an absolute cross-section measurement. The problem with ratio measurements is that we do not know how to unfold them because there is no event migration between bins of an observable ratio. Unfolding would then have to be done separately between the numerator and the denominator, which breaks some of the correlations that are exploited in ratio measurements. A bin-by-bin correction to a ratio would assume that there is no correlation between bins of an observable, which is not accurate. The Tufts ATLAS group has recently developed an object-based event-by-event unfolding algorithm using Conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (cDDPM)(Pazos et al.). The objective of this project is to use this algorithm to demonstrate that the ratio of observables can be unfolded, and by comparing standard methods with our diffusion model unfolding, we show the upsides of our method. 


# Code Instructions
